In this section we're going to look at computing
the derivative of an orthogonal rotation matrix.
One of the properties of an orthogonal matrix
is that it's inverse is equal to its transpose
so we can write this simple relationship R times it's transpose must be equal to the identity matrix.
First off I'm going to consider the simple
case of a rotation by the angle theta about
the X-axis. I can take the derivative with
respect to theta and using the chain rule
I can write this. Applying this identity I
can rewrite it in this particular form and
I can simplify it by introducing the symbol
S to represent this expression here.
The matrix S has an interesting property. If
I add it to its transpose the result will
be equal to zero. And this kind of matrix
is referred to as a skew-symmetric matrix.
That property of the skew-symmetric matrix
can also be written like this. So this kind
of matrix is also sometimes referred to as
an anti-symmetric matrix.
These matrices are always singular that is
that it determines is always equal to zero.
Any matrix can be written as the sum of a
symmetric matrix and a skew-symmetric matrix.
In three dimensions the skew-symmetric matrix
has this form. It's got a very distinctive
zero diagonal and there are only three unique
elements in this matrix x, y, z and each of
them appears with a positive sign and a negative
sign. Now the interesting characteristic of
the skew-symmetric matrix is it’s a way to
write the vector cross product relationship
as the product of a skew-symmetric matrix
computed from the vector A multiplied by the
vector B. So cross product can be turned into
a matrix vector product.
Here's our earlier expression for S and I
can write down an expression for a matrix
which represents rotation about the X axis
by the angle theta. If I substitute these
values in, and simplify I end up with a very
simple matrix containing a lot of zeroes one
and a minus one. Recalling our earlier expression
for a skew-symmetric matrix this matrix that
I've just written down I can write as a skew-
symmetric matrix of the vector [1 0 0]. So the
derivative of a rotation matrix with respect
to theta is given by the product of a skew-
symmetric matrix multiplied by the original
rotation matrix.
I can perform the algebraic manipulation for
a rotation around the Y axis and also for
a rotation around the Z axis and I get these
expressions here and you can clearly see some
kind of pattern. Now let's consider the general
case. A rotation about the vector L by an
angle theta and it can be shown that this
is equal to the product of a skew-symmetric
matrix computed from the vector L multiplied
by the original rotation matrix.
If I now multiply both sides of the expression
by dee theta dee T, that's the rate of change of theta,
I can write an expression like this.
What this is, is a time derivative of a general rotation matrix.
A rotation of theta about the vector L is
equal to a skew-symmetric matrix computed
on the vector Omega multiplied by the original
rotational matrix.
Omega in this case is the angular velocity
vector. It is the rate of change of angle
multiplied by the vector direction about which
the rotation is occurring.